---
layout: post
title: Street Fighter III, 2nd Impact vs 3rd Strike
---

  I was trolling around on youtube today when I came across some footage of Street Fighter 3: 2nd Impact. As a big fan of 3rd Strike, I was interested in seeing an earlier iteration of a game I loved. After watching, I was surprised at how stylistically different 2nd impact is. While the character sprites and core gameplay are basically the same, the aesthetic is completely different.

  First a little explainer for those not versed in Street Fighter, SF3 was one of the last fighting games released by Capcom before the "drought" of the aughts. There were three iterations of SF3 each with a different sub-title: "New Generation", "2nd Impact", and "3rd Strike" respectively. New Generation and 2nd Impact were both released in 1997, then in 1999 Capcom released 3rd Strike, the last Street Fighter game til SF4 came out in 2008. From what I've seen of 2nd Impact, it seems like those two years were spent totally revamping the game's visuals and audio design into something cohesive and new.

  From what I can tell, New Generation and 2nd Impact were designed in the same visual idiom as Capcom's other mid 90s games, easily exemplified by the [Vs Series](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marvel_vs._Capcom_(series) and the Alpha series([Alpha 3](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Street_Fighter_Alpha_3) was released just a year after 2nd impact). This idiom is fine but is so starkly different compared to 3rd strike. I think the character select screens are a pretty good launching point so I'll start there. First let's take a look at the 2nd Impact screen. Here's a clip which features the [2nd impact character select screen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOZuaz2Lnbc#t=48).

  The first thing that jumped out to me when I saw this was just how washed out all the colors are. The palettes for each character are very very light and the shading is done in huge, obvious blocks. The minimal shading is made worse by the spotlight shining on each character's body. I'm guessing that's supposed to be the light from the middle of the screen but the blockiness of the shading just makes the colors seem off. For example, the whole left side of ryu's face is basically pure white, it's kind of comical and very cartoony. The thickness of the lines further emphasizes the cartoon look. Finally, this is a little subjective but I also the character's poses make them look goofy and weak. Specifically, Necro looks like he's deep in thought, Ibuki looks tentative, Urien looks like he's going for a drug addled fist bump, Elena is doing stretches, and Oro is about to lose his lunch. These would be great with a puzzle fighter aesthetic but seem odd in a core Street Fighter game.

  The second thing I notice is the music. The music is bizarrely cheery and flat (like soda, not pitch). It's the kind of generic music I'd expect to see in an obscure Japanese shmup ([Area 88](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uxv5A3xZnm8) for example), not in a main stream fighting game and DEFINITELY not in the precursor to 3rd Strike. Part of that lack of depth is just sound quality, but after listening carefully to 3rd strike's music, I think the real issue is that there is no real attempt at hiding how lo-fi the sound is. It's just a simple melody with a little background harmony and drum fills.

  Next, let's talk about the actual sound effects. The sound effect for cursor movement is this high pitched ping sound that I'd expect in a movie about bomb disposal. It's such an odd choice for the action. To me it makes the menu feel like some high tech interface. This also plays into the Japanese shmup thing I mentioned with the music. When you select a character, there's a sort of heavy bass drum and then a high note. This sound isn't too bad, it's a lot more impactful than the movement sound, but I don't think it pops the way it should.

  Then there's the announcer. The announcer sharply contrasts everything else. It's this deep gravely voice that calls out your character name. I do think the 3rd Strike announcer is better, but this is one part I'm okay with. The announcer doesn't mesh well with the other elements but on his own he's not bad.

  Now let's compare all these elements with their 3rd strike counterparts. Here's [3rd Strike's character select](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vz4d2Gl3NbM#t=50) for comparison.

  First thing again is the character portraits. The use of lighting/shading is so much more sophisticated in these portraits. There's clearly a light above them, and while there's some of the extreme brightness it's used so much more economically it gives the portraits a ton of depth. 3rd strike also opts to focus the portraits on the face rather than torso. This choice emphasizes personality and intimacy, making the characters seem much stronger. Oro and Necro are particularly improved, each looking at the "camera" with menacingly blank expressions.

  The music while kind of muted is substantially more complicated. Instead of a simple melody, there's hip-hop artist [Infinite](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghetto_Concept) rapping with a sax, drum, and base line with strings holding out notes over everything. I believe the sound chip is the same but the way the tracks are layered hides the fidelity from the listener, making the aural experience seem deeper and more engaging.

  Then there're the sound effects. The first thing to notice is the movement sound effect. It's this amazing, deep, toggling sound. It almost sounds like a pipe hitting the ground. It's hard to describe and very unique. When you actually select a character you get a deep bass drum type sound, as in 2nd Impact, and then the Announcer calls out to you "Woah, I got the picture!", when you select your super he says "Yeah, I've been waiting for this!". Such an interesting dynamic emerges from this change. When picking your character, the game is gets buddy buddy with you, slink up next to you because it's excited to see your match. I think this is substantially more engaging than 2nd Impact's character select screen. It creates a feeling of going somewhere underground (like an arcade!) for some fighting. It's compelling and engaging.

  That's all for now, I'll probably write more about this and focus on some of the in game aesthetic differences.
